.TH coolterm 1 "5 November 2022"
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH NAME
coolterm \- Unicode terminal for remote access to Unix/Windows machines
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH USAGE
\fBcoolterm\fP [OPTIONS] -host <remote-ip-address>
.br
\fBcoolterm\fP [OPTIONS] -host localhost
.br
\fBcoolterm\fP [OPTIONS]
.br
\fBcoolterm\fP -h
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
This is a standalone Unicode xterm/rxvt terminal that can connect
to the remote server \fBremotefs\fP or \fBREMOTEFS.EXE\fP, or run
locally as a regular terminal.

\fBCoolterm\fP will forward X Window System sessions backward through
the connection by automatically setting the \fBDISPLAY\fP environment
variable.

.\".\"DONT_SPLIT"
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I "-h"
Print out \fBcooledit\fP full help. Not all options apply.
.TP
.I "-host"
Specify the remote IP address where \fBremotefs\fP or \fBREMOTEFS.EXE\fP
is running. \fI-host\fP \fBlocalhost\fP invokes a local terminal.
.TP
.I "-script <sh-shell-script>"
Run a shell script, retrieving the exit code. This works on Unix and Windows.
For example try 

.nf
coolterm -host 192.168.1.1 -script \\
 'for i in 1 2 3; do echo $i `date`; sleep 1; done; exit 7;'
echo $?
.fi

.PP
.SH INSTALLATION
See the man page remotefs(1) for info on configuring \fBremotefs\fP or \fBREMOTEFS.EXE\fP
.PP
.SH FILES
.I AESKEYFILE
.IP
The contents of file \fIAESKEYFILE\fP on the remote server will need to be copied
for encryption support.
.PP
.SH AVAILABILITY
The latest public release of this program can be found at
.br
\fBhttp://www.ibiblio.org/pub/Linux/apps/editors/X/cooledit/\fP
.PP
.SH SEE ALSO
cooledit(1), remotefs(1).
.PP
.SH AUTHORS
Paul Sheer
.PP

