.TH remotefs 1 "12 September 2022"
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH NAME
remotefs \- Remote File System access tool for Windows and Unix
.\"SKIP_SECTION"
.SH USAGE
.B remotefs
[OPTIONS] <listen-address> <accept-ip-range>
.br
.B remotefs
-h
.br
.B REMOTEFS.EXE
[OPTIONS] <listen-address> <accept-ip-range>
.SH DISCLAIMER
The information in this file is provided without warranty
for its accuracy or completeness. Use of this file or its
information is entirely at your own risk.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
This is a standalone executable to run on a remote machine that
gives \fBcooledit\fP remote file-system access. The allowed operations
are reading and writing of files, directory listing, reading
of file permissions and ownership.

This means you can use \fBcooledit\fP to edit files on a remote
machine, even a Windows machine. The advantage of this tool is low
latency saving and loading files and the advantage that this can
be done securely of the Internet.

You will notice in the bottom left of the \fBcooledit\fP file-browser
is a new input to enter the IP of the remote machine or \fIlocalhost\fP
for the local machine.

The executable \fBREMOTEFS.EXE\fP is provided in the distribution for
running on Windows. You will need to open a command prompt.
.\".\"DONT_SPLIT"
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I "-h"
Print help and exit.
.TP
.I "--no-crypto"
Disable crypto. All data is send in plain-text with no security or authentication.
This effectively reverts \fBremotefs\fP to the version before encryption was supported.
Mainly useful for debugging. Use the \fBDisable crypto\fP button if security is not
required.
.TP
.I "--force-crypto"
Require encryption, or reject transaction. Normally host are allowed to hit the button
\fBDisable crypto\fP when prompted for a password. This option disallows this.
.TP
.I "-k <file>, --key-file <file>"
Read AES key from <file>. Default: AESKEYFILE
.br
If not specified, AESKEYFILE will be created and populated with a strong random key.
If AESKEYFILE exists it will be read.
.TP
.I "<listen-address>"
The interface to bind to. Try running \fBifconfig\fP on Unix or \fBIPCONFIG.EXE\fP on Windows to list available IP addresses.
.TP
.I "<accept-ip-range>"
The address ranges allowed to connect. Remote clients not in the range are dropped. Users ought to be cautious
who is allowed to connect since \fBremotefs\fP gives full access to all files on the machine. Both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses
are supported. Ranges of the form IP-IP and IP/MASK are supported. An example is \fB10.1.0.1-10.1.0.99,fe80::9df2:ea47:67b9:644f,fe80::c6f0:196e:0000:123a/64,192.168.1.16/30\fP.
.PP
.SH ENCRYPTION
The encryption algorithm is as follows.
.PP
.nf
.B Definitions
    P => plaintext
    M => ciphertext
    K1, k2 => key
    V => IV
    I => nonce

    V, S, s, A1, A2, I, Q are 128 bits
    P, C, D are n * 128 bits, n > 0
    D is discarded

    AES_CBC_ENC(key, IV, plaintext) => (newIV, ciphertext)
    SHA256(...) => (128bit, 128bit)

.B Encryption
    (C, Q) <= AES_CBC_ENC(K1, V, (I, P))
    (A1, A2) <= SHA256(V, C(firstblock), Q, AES_ECB_ENC(K2, V))
    (D, S) <= AES_CBC_ENC(K2, A1, C)
    (D, S) <= AES_CBC_ENC(K2, S, A2)
    M <= (V, C, S)

.B Decryption
    (V, C, s) <= M
    (A1, A2) <= SHA256(V, C(firstblock), C(lastblock), AES_ECB_ENC(K2, V))
    (D, S) <= AES_CBC_ENC(K2, A, C)
    (D, S) <= AES_CBC_ENC(K2, S, A2)
    S ?= s
    ((I, P), Q) <= AES_CBC_DEC(K1, V, C)
.fi
.PP
.SH EXAMPLE
To enable a \fBcooledit\fP process running on any machine 192.168.1.2 through 192.168.1.254 to access the machine 192.168.1.1, login on 192.168.1.1 and run this:

.nf
  remotefs 192.168.1.1 192.168.1.2-192.168.1.254
.fi

Then copy the contents of the file \fIAESKEYFILE\fP:

.nf
  cat AESKEYFILE
  LUs7UPqmsocLHAdQMVmht4avPMvgSW4HtCybMGvKQoYn
.fi

Then run \fBcooledit\fP on, say \fI192.168.1.99\fP.
Then select the menu option \fBFile -> Open\fP. Then select \fI192.168.1.1\fP in the \fIIP:\fP input in \fBcooledit\fP's file browser.
The file browser will prompt you for an AES key. Hit \fBShit-Ins\fP (or mouse middle button) to paste the key.

.PP
.SH FILES
.I AESKEYFILE
.IP
Contains the default AES key. This file is created when \fBremotefs\fP first starts up and will contain a strongly-random-generated key.
.PP
.SH AVAILABILITY
The latest public release of this program can be found at
.br
\fBhttp://www.ibiblio.org/pub/Linux/apps/editors/X/cooledit/\fP
.PP
.SH SEE ALSO
cooledit(1).
.PP
.SH AUTHORS
Paul Sheer
.PP

